Hi!
Welcome to the Haskell Weekly podcast. This is a show
about Haskell, a purely functional programming
language. I'm your host, Taylor Fausak. I'm the
lead engineer at ITProTV, an ACI
learning company. And with me today is Cameron
Gera, one of the engineers on my team. Thanks for joining me
today, Cam.
>> Of course, man. I'm glad to be back after, you know, a week
off. Sorry to all of our
listeners who didn't get
that Monday morning joy of
Haskell Weekly coming out.
>> Well it's all right. We're gonna be
reliving last week this week because there was a lot of
good news that we want to go over. And, uh, yeah,
just all kinds of crazy stuff happening in the world of GHC.
>> Yeah, GHC started off 2021 with a bang. You know,
we've already talked about you know, the
GHC 2021 grouping
of language extensions. And today we're gonna be kind of
diving in, Um, to
more awesome news in GHC and just the Haskell community in
general. Um, and I think our first
kind of order uh,
yeah, order of business here is to
congratulate the Haskell Foundation for picking their
executive director and chief technology officer.
Um, those are two positions that I think
with the people they chose is going to do great things.
Um, I know Taylor, you have a little bit more experience with
who they chose. Do you want to kind of
talk more about that?
>> Sure, I'd be happy to. So on the
discourse for Haskell, which is like, you know,
the forum. Simon Peyton Jones
announced that the Haskell Foundation picked the executive
director and the chief technology officer. Like you
said, uh, the executive director
is Andrew Boardman, and I
actually had not heard of him before. Haven't interacted with him,
but there's a little intro there in the post. We'll have a link in the
show notes. And he sounds like a great guy and,
you know, ready to helm this new
foundation and lead it in a good direction. So I'm looking
forward to what he's able to do. Um, and
also the chief technology
officer, which was kind of like a bonus selection
for the Haskell Foundation. I think they only intended to pick
an executive director, but um,
everybody was so on board with this person
that, you know, they were able to give her a role.
So Emily Pillmore is the CTO for the
Haskell Foundation. Um, I have interacted with her.
She's a great person, and she's gonna be in charge of all
the technical decision making for the
foundation itself.
>> I think that's awesome. Congratulations, Andrew and Emily.
We look forward to seeing
how the Haskell Foundation
flourishes under your guys's leadership. So I'm
really excited about that.
>> Yeah! I think this is an important step for the foundation.
And, uh, I think we may have talked about it a little bit
before, maybe last year even. But for those not in the
know, the Haskell Foundation,
um is still kind of nascent, like still
coming together a little bit. But the intent
is to have, like, one
guiding light for the Haskell
community slash ecosystem. Or to put it another way to
kind of bring together all of these disparate
communities and groups that Haskell has, like the
Haskell.org committee and the core Libraries
Committee and all the people that maintain all these
different packages having a common area for all of
them, you know, to pool resources or ask for help or that type
of thing and and many other things. So, really
looking forward to the Haskell Foundation. This is a excellent start.
>> Yeah, it seems like it's gonna make a big
waves for Haskell in the overall programming.
You know, realm. Um, you know, obviously there's large
organizations that use Haskell, but a lot of people don't
know that. Um and so I think having a
foundation that is centered around creating
this, you know,
awareness and education around
Haskell, what can provide you will really
allow other organizations to hear that and be like, Okay, let's
give it a shot. So, Think it's
great for, you know, all the Haskellers out there because it
will eventually mean more job opportunities.
>> Exactly. And we're not a large company, but we're a
small company, and we use Haskell. And I think there's some good
stuff. Uh, you know, even for us, like you mentioned, it'll be
easier to hire Haskell people in the future. If
the Haskell Foundation succeeds at what it's trying to do, which I think it
will. So shall we move on to
some of the GHC news?
>> Oh, yeah. Drumroll, please.
>> Well, we're going to start with a small one.
So
The GHC
8.10.4 was released,
and this is a very small bug fix release, but
it's probably the end of the line for the 8.10
series. And this one's important. It shores up a
couple bugs with windows, um, and linking and some other
little things. So pretty much if you're currently
using 8.10 dot something, you should upgrade to
8.10.4.
>> Yeah. Shouldn't really have any obviously major
breaking changes and should allow you
to be up to date.
Um, you know, maybe maybe we gotta pour one out for the
8.10 series, you know, be like it's done a lot of good for the
Haskell world.
>> Yeah. I mean, we're still using it at work.
Um, and we were fortunate because we're we use
stack and Stackage and the most
recent version of Stackage. Both nightly and
LTS use 8.10.4. So it's
a pretty seamless upgrade for us.
>> Nice Well, you know, we keep talking
about this being the last of the series.
Well, what's next? What's next for GHC? Um,
and I love you to announce that. Good, Sir
Taylor.
>> So the big ticket release
is G.H.C. 9.0.1.
Um, this has been, um,
a lot of people have been very excited about this release
and for good reason. There's a lot of big ticket things that landed
here that are, um maybe not
fundamental changes to Haskell, but,
um, very big changes.
So the biggest one, perhaps,
is the addition of linear types
through a language extension on that comes
to us in GHC 9. So now you can
download the compiler and try out linear
types.
>> I know you were, you know, still
learning more about linear type because it's not obviously
something we used in our current Haskell,
um, implementations because it hasn't really been available
to us. What's kind of some examples
of what linear types help with
those who may not know.
>> Yeah. So I don't feel super qualified to
be an authority on this, because I don't know a lot about linear types
myself. Um, the way that I understand it maybe the
best, like go to example of what
our linear types or what they can help. What can they help
with is to look at rust.
And there's an important caveat here that Rust
doesn't actually have linear types. It has a related
thing called affine types. Um, and my
understanding is that the differences with linear
types, um, you have to
use your argument once,
like exactly one time and with affine types, you
have the choice. You can either use it or not.
Um, so it seems like kind of a pedantic
difference, and it probably is. But by and large, if you're wondering
what are linear types, I think it's what Rust
does is a reasonable way to look at it.
>> Okay, cool. Awesome. Well, let's get on to
the next one that I know you're thrilled about.
I feel like this is the one where you're like, GHC
9's out, and this is what it gives us like it's
qualified do, right? Like, what's
the deal with qualified do? Why is it awesome?
>> Yeah, So this one, it's kind of funny because it ties in with
linear types quite a bit, um, but only
they're sort of orthogonal to each other, but
they both benefit each other. So qualified do means
that normally, if you use
do notation in a Haskell program, it will
use the bind operator from the
prelude that greater than greater than Equal Sign
Operator, which works for the monad class.
Um, there have been ways
to change how that works. There's a There's a very
big hammer of a language extension called rebindable
syntax that lets you choose
whatever bind operator you want. But
what qualified do lets you do
is for each
at each place where you use the
keyword. Do you can qualify it like you would
any other identifier or operator in your program, and you could
say some monad dot do,
And then within that block, it
will use some monad dot bind rather
than the one from the prelude.
So this might sound
kind of pointless, like for most, most of the monads that
most people use most of the time using a lot of
weasel words here, uh, it won't matter because,
like, you know, you could do a ReaderT and that'll work with
monad whatever. But if you wanted to use, for
instance linear types with a linear monad,
it wouldn't type Check. I'm pretty sure
again, I'm not an authority on linear types, but,
uh, yeah, it can allow you to do
new, more powerful things. Um, there's
a related concept called
indexed monads. Hopefully I I
think it's related you could do index monads with qualified
do, um Or if you just wanted to be more
specific and say, like, maybe dot do
or, you know, list dot Do or something like that. A little
more Elm-ish in the explicitness.
>> Yeah, Yeah, that's what I was kind of
picturing when you first started talking about qualified. Do was like,
maybe dot do list dot do, um
and just kind of explicitly setting the monad in which the two
up, you know, which we're working in.
I think that's kind of Ah,
you know, I'm excited to see what it does for us. I
don't think for me
right now. I don't see us gaining a ton of benefits from it,
but I also don't. I've never used it. I don't
understand fully why it would be
super great, but I'm excited to learn
and, you know, kind of take those steps towards
seeing the significance in this, um,
in the version. Bump.
>> Yeah, I am, too. And I think one area
that this might be kind of abused
a little bit is that you could use qualified
do to make a DSL
that just happens to use do notation to, like,
split things up on the separate lines. So if you wanted to
write like a, you know, Web server
router, where you put the routes each on their own
line and the Scotty library kind already does this
anyway. But you could do that without actually having
to implement a monad behind the scenes, which maybe
could be helpful. I'm not sure it would depend on exactly what you're
implementing. So it might be nice and some other weird
ways We'll see what the community does with it. I like you. I'm
excited to see where this goes.
>> Yeah, awesome. Well, we've got another
think. Biggest change related to
GHC bignum
>> Yeah. Big change, bignum.
>> Oh, yeah. How it's gonna replace the
integer GMP.
>> Mhm. So I could give a little bit of color
commentary here. So, um,
when you use arbitrary
precision, integrals in Haskell. So,
like the integer type or the natural
type where they're unbounded, they could be as big as you want
behind the scenes, those are using currently with like
8.10 and before they're using a library called integer
GMP. GMP stands for the GNU
multiple precision. Something like
that. Anyway, uh,
some people dislike this library because it
is licensed with the GPL, which is like
a copyleft license so. There's a
replacement library called integer simple, but
it's a lot slower, and it's written in pure
Haskell rather than integer GMP, which I think is either C or
C++ so GHC bignum
is trying to get the best of both worlds here,
where you can have arbitrary precision
integers and you can use them without
using GPL licensed code. And it will be code that's
maintained by GHC and I think
mostly written in Haskell. I don't know what the implementation of
bignum looks like, so it's a little behind the
scenes, but it's a good change nonetheless.
>> Yeah, it seems like it will give you give
programmers a little more freedom. Uh,
so that's cool. Awesome. Um,
all right, so we have the next ticket item here,
which is simplified subsumption setting
things up for quick. Look
impredicativity.
>> That's a mouthful. Yeah. So this
is this is something that I am definitely not
qualified to remark on. Um,
I know that. Yeah.
Impredicativity? Come on. Um, I know that
Richard Eisenberg, who is actually the
chair of the Haskell Foundation board,
um, he has a YouTube channel where he's doing,
like, these kind of quick bites of explaining concepts because
he's a He's a GHC contributor. Very smart guy.
And he's, you know, pushing on some of this quick look
impredicativity stuff. So if you want to
know more about it, I would recommend find that YouTube
channel or look at what he's written.
He's excellent communicator, and it's
my own fault that I don't know any about any of this stuff,
so yeah, um
but yeah, this is just some changes to the type system
that are coming, and I think they'll be good.
>> Yeah, And if you know more about any of these topics. And you have
any interest in being on the podcast and explaining
them for us like we would love to have You we're always looking
guests on the podcast. So just a quick
sidebar there. Uh huh. But yeah.
So now I think this language
extension that's coming with GHC
9.0.1 will
help us and, I think, help the community, which
is the new lexical negation. A
situation that we have.
>> Yeah. So now we're into the area of things. I feel very
comfortable being an authority on. So lexical
negation, uh, basically means it's a language
extension, like you said. And what it means is that
the spacing around a negative sign
will be important. So normally in
current Haskell, if you write X minus one,
that pretty much always means X minus one.
Um, whether or not it's X
space minus space one or all run together or any
variation with lexical
negation. If you do X space minus space
one that means X minus one like it always did. But if you do
X space minus one kind of smushed
together, then that minus one will be a
single unit and won't mean minus one anymore.
Um and this seems a little
nitpicky. Maybe, but something similar
already happens with the dot or the
period where sometimes
it means like a qualified thing,
Right. If you have some name dot some identifier, then
it's a qualified thing. But if you put spaces in there,
suddenly it means function, composition or whatever.
Operator, you have imported usually function composition.
So I think the precedent has already been
set that white space is or can be
important for these operator type things. And I really like
this because one of the annoying kind of gotchas with
Haskell is that if you if you have some function that takes a
number and you want to pass a negative number to it, you have to wrap
it in parentheses, which is, I mean, honestly, kind of
silly. And this language extension will mean you don't have
to use parentheses anymore.
>> Yeah, I think, Yeah, I think this is gonna be
good? I don't really think it could have a huge
impact on current existing code. I do
think moving forward that I think it will be really
nice. I'm curious. With like some of the external
tooling out there like HLint that says, Hey, we
see you've got this language extension installed. Now you have these
parens negative one. Those can go away
now, like those kind of things may become possible, which would
be, you know, a nice quality of life improvement.
Yes, parens aren't terrible, but they're also
kind of pointless for that situation. So it would be
nice to have that I think this next
one, we're gonna talk about those, actually, my favorite, because
if you have a giant project loading
GHCi and the giant project is tough
unless you manually set the prompt to something else
So this is saying the GHC prompt will no longer
list loaded modules. I imagine there's still
gonna be some shortcut to get to them. If you need to see what's imported
or what's in scope, all you can always just say, What's this?
Is it there cool. It is. Let's use it. If
not, let's import it and
be able to use it then.
>> Yeah, So for those not in the know, this has been another
kind of long time uh,
paper cut of the Haskell
REPL, where if you fire up GHCi it'll
normally say prelude and then like a
greater than sign. And that's where you type in your stuff. And if you import
module like data dot map, then it will say prelude space
data dot map and then your prompt, Um,
And for us, when we start GHCi
for our project at work, we have on the order of,
like, 1000 to 2000 modules. So our
prompt, if we don't customize it, has 1000
modules, all all of their names there and
then the little greater than sign. And then we type in whatever. So
that's completely useless to us and takes up a ton of screen
space. And this change will make it so that we
don't have to customize our prompt anymore. It'll just do kind of
what it probably should have always done in the first place.
>> Yeah, because, I mean, if you have everything listed,
you could write a function, and by the time
you hit enter, you're never going to see the output because
it's gonna be wiped away by the new list of
modules that the new prompt has
>> exactly
>> like it's rough.
So we're excited about that. I
think this one will be good
overall. Long term for the Haskell community
is making the haddock
parsing more resilient, right? Because
haddock deals with a lot of documentation, right?
>> Yes. So there's a lot of things kind of balled up
in this, um, part of the change log,
and some people may not have
run into these problems, but I've run into them and they're really annoying. So
with haddock, your comments
become more important, right? Because your documentation lives
in your comments. And haddock has
certain things that are special that it cares
about. So the most important one that most people are probably already
familiar with is starting a comment with the vertical
pipe. So if you do dash dash pipe, that means okay, I'm
starting a documentation comment here. This will be attached to the
function or type or whatever and then
rendered when I run haddock. Um,
there are other things that are important, like dash dash
star and that one I mention because I run into
this frequently, where a project will
build just fine when I'm not producing any
documentation and then When I try to build the documentation,
it will crash, like, fail to compile. Because I
have a comment somewhere that says, like Dash Dash, star, star
star, important star, star star, You know, don't do
this. And Haddock's like, Hey, I tried
to, you know, interpret this as some special markup for myself, and I
wasn't able to. And you know, I'm thinking, Why did you do
that? Haddock. That's silly. Um, but yeah. So
with GHC 9, it will be more resilient to these,
so it won't crash. I think it will instead
produce a warning so that you can
realize like, Oh, this is ambiguous. If this is meant to be parsed
by haddock or not,
>> that sounds helpful. Like that would
be really frustrating. Very much my
code works. And then you're like, Wait, what now? I'm building
documentation. What happened?
>> Yeah, and many people don't build documentation themselves.
So this problem gets even worse because you can have a
project that builds perfectly fine for yourself, and then you
release it and upload it to Hackage.
And somebody complains like, Hey, you don't have any
documentation on Hackage like, Yeah, I wrote
documentation for everything, and it's because oh, Haddock failed to build.
Um, so it'll actually be a little while until Haddock uses
GHC 9. Excuse me. Hackage uses GHC 9,
but when it does, we can look forward to this being a little
more resilient.
>> That's good. Yeah. Speaking
of you know, nightlies and LTS and
Stackage. You know, we got a little while
probably before that's coming out next couple of weeks.
>> Yeah, I saw a tweet. I forget who it
was from one of the Stackage maintainers
announcing that, you know, the
nightlies and LTS are using GHC
8.10.4. And they're looking to use GHC 9
quickly on the nightlies. But I think a lot of packages they're going to
get booted out because either they have
version constraints that maybe just need to be relaxed
or something changed in, You know, the
GHCi, uh the bits of
GHC that they use that needs to be changed to support it.
Um, but yeah, I just wanted to wrap up with
GHC 9. So there are many, many more
things in the change log. It was hard to pick kind of
the big ticket things that we should talk about because there's
so many, Um there's a lot of bug fixes.
There's a lot of performance improvements. Both when it comes to
how quickly GHC compiles your code,
but also with the code that GHC produces, it may run
faster as well. So GHC 9 is just
like an amazing release. Very excited for so many things in
it.
>> Yeah, that's awesome, I mean You always expect, you know,
quote unquote performance enhancements with any
release of anything, you know, you get a new iPhone, your
android phone, latest new processor like
all those things. So that's you know, that's
exciting because I think GHC
needed that, um, you know, And
they could do this with such a big release that has so
many other enhancements as well.
>> Yeah, and I wanted to call that out because I know some
people are concerned that if GHC
focuses on these fancy
new type system enhancements like linear types
than maybe the more mundane or
boring like quality of life improvements aren't gonna happen. Or
even compiler performance may get worse as a result. But
that is not the case, at least for this release. So
kudos to the GHC team. They're doing amazing work.
It's just again. Great release.
>> Yeah, I know. I'm really hoping we can get to it soon,
but some of our tooling, you know, we're just tightly
coupled. GHC versions
Weeder, Brittany. Those guys
just kind of make us have to slow down for all the new
hotness, because we've gotta wait for it to support it
had worked through all of its
transitions.
>> Yeah, and we've talked on this show before about
HLS, which some of us use and is also tightly coupled to
the GHC version. So, yeah, the
tooling side leaves maybe a little bit to be
desired. But it also encourages you to use
tooling that isn't tightly coupled to GHC in that
way.
>> Yeah, that's true. Maybe she could
takes, um, more enhancements in the tooling realm. I don't
know.
>> Yeah, yeah, they
definitely have their work cut out for them, but it would be
excellent from our point of view if they could
roll in some of these projects to GHC
itself. So, like Weeder, for instance,
Onley relies on the HIE files that
GHC now produces, rather than having to interact with
the GHC API So it's a little
less coupled. Um, and then, you know, kind of like blue
sky. It would be amazing if GHC had a formatter
built in, and then we wouldn't need to use Brittany. But that may be a
bridge too far.
>> We can always hope and dream, right?
>> Yeah, exactly um. But I
think we had one last thing to talk about today, which
is kind of related to the GHC 9
release. There's a new package put together
by Tweag, uh, called
linear-base. And this
is like a replacement for the base library. So
kind of, ah, standard library, so to
speak, specifically for linear types.
Um, And like I mentioned with linear types,
I am not an authority here. I'll encourage you to go read the blog
post where they announced this. Um, but
the long and short of it is that in order to effectively work
with linear types, you need a lot of common utilities to
have linear versions, and that's what linear base
provides. And it also provides
many other things that aren't provided by the base library,
like, um, efficient arrays,
vectors, hash maps, sets. So things that you
can get from other libraries, like array and vector and containers and
unordered containers. But they're all in one library now.
Um, and it also has even more stuff, like
has a streaming abstraction built in, so think, like
conduit or pipes. And it also has lenses and
optics, like the lens library or the optics library
on. But I think they're looking to add even more stuff to it. So it seems
to be a surprisingly well featured
standard library, considering how new all of this stuff
is.
>> Yeah, that's awesome. Yeah. And if you're looking for the
blog post, it will be in the show notes as well.
>> Mm. Or go check issue 250 of the newsletter and
go sign up while you're at it.
>> Wow. We're at 250 man? That's awesome.
>> Yeah.
>> 250.
>> Been doing it a while. Um, but yeah,
Like I said, I think those were the main highlights that we wanted to touch
on for GHC and related stuff going on over the past
couple weeks. Um, Cam did you have anything else that you wanted to remark
on?
>> No, I think I'm excited about GHC 9 and
seeing where it takes the Haskell community. And
obviously all the other stuff we talked about is fantastic.
So I'm really looking forward. to Yeah.
Being a Haskell programmer. It's awesome.
>> Yeah, sure is. We're gonna have to learn more about linear types,
so we'll see how that goes.
>> Yeah, maybe we can walk our listeners through it once we've
learned we could just maybe here at work, you
know, have some people figure out what linear types are and teach
us.
>> Mm. Yeah. We may need to have some of our Haskell
wizards on the engineering team teach us how it
works.
>> I know, they're pretty excited about it, So
yeah, that'll be good. No, Maybe have them. Come
on. The podcast. Try to get Zach on the podcast today, but
he wasn't quite ready, so that's okay, but maybe next time.
>> One of these days we'll convince him,
but yeah, I think that will do it for us. Thank you
for listening to the Haskell weekly podcast. I have been your
host, Taylor Fausak, and the other voice you heard
today was Cameron Gera. If you'd like to find out
more about Haskell weekly, you can check out our website
Haskell weekly dot news. If you like the
show, please rate and review us on apple
podcasts. And if you have any feedback you'd like to give to
us, just tweet us at Haskell Weekly
>> and Haskell Weekly is brought to you by ITProTV an
ACI learning company and our employer. They
would like to offer you 30% off your subscription by using
promo code Haskell Weekly 30 at
check Out. That does it for
us. Good. Sir. Taylor, I really like using that name
today.
>> It sure does. So, yeah. Thank you for joining us on the Haskell
Weekly podcast. And we'll see you hopefully next week.
>> See you next week.
>> Bye
>> Peace